So now that we've seen how to make a mess of our machine,
I wanna show you a few tools for checking the health
and status of the machine.
So the first ones we're gonna look at is for disc space.
Again, just to repeat it, you can, if you have
a good way to check these kinda things,
it's worth using those.
But I wanna show them so that you how to use them
on a machine that you might have connected to.
So the first one is disc free.
So if I run disc free I get a lot of numbers
and stuff that isn't particularly useful to me,
and I'm pretty much hard-wired to do DF dash KH.
That means if we looked at the man page for DF rather,
that gives us two extra things.
First one is it groups these blocks,
instead of being bytes, it gives me kilobytes,
so the K means kilobytes.
I can do megabytes instead.
It just means that it divides the bytes differently.
It also gives me a human readable number.
And it's really the human readable number that I'm
most interested in, and I'm pretty sure you can do
the same thing on LS as well, dash H, human readable.
Now what that's giving me a glance
is that I have 350 or 345 gig
available on my MAC.
Now I've got the size of the drive, the amount used
amount available and the percentages
of the things I'm interested in,
but there's also other drives here that mounted.
And these are more virtual drives
that I'm not particularly interested in
when I'm looking at this information.
I'm looking for dev disc one.
When I have like a USB drive mounted,
it will list it here as well as dev.
It'll be a different disc number in fact.
So we'll see them listed here.
Now if I just switch over to this second tab I've opened,
I've gone and signed into the production machine for JS Bin,
and as you can see, when I've done DF dash KH or MH,
I get slightly different output because it's
different operating system running
different kind of flavour of Linux.
And what I've got here is human readable values
that tells me that the dev drive
at X, whatever it is, has got about eight gig on it,
and we're just over 60% usage.
Now that number doesn't really climb very much,
so I'm kind of happy with that.
The rest of these are kind of virtual drives.
Anything on dev means it's actually mounted.
And I can see I've got roughly 150 gig mounted here,
and the place it's mounted on, that's how I access it.
See, if we look back on my local machine,
we can see I'm mounted on Roots here.
I actually have three drives.
One is the main one that's in, that is Roots.
But I also have this slash MMT,
which has some bits on it, really the log directory.
And I also have this MMT
old JS Bin, which is an old backup drive that I have.
So I have multiple drives mounted on this machine,
and it lists the available disc space here.
So going back to my local machine,
we may wanna know where that disc space is being taken,
so if I list out the directories, I could go ahead
and try and add these numbers up.
We could put human readable again.
Like I say, it's 100 bytes for a directory.
The freezing log is 57K now,
but we can use a command called DU, so disc usage.
If I hit enter, it's gonna search every single category
and show me the disc usage for each directory,
including parent directories and everything.
I think right at the bottom there is the amount
of disc space used by this directory,
and again it's in bytes.
So I wanna do DU dash H,
which tells me it's using 46 gig.
Using this directory specs the videos up in your recording.
And it lists everything.
Depending on how big the drive is or the directory
you're looking at, can take a long time,
and maybe you don't want all the previous information,
so we have dash S, which is giving me the summary number.
That's 46 gig, so I can see there's a lot of files
in this public directory.
And if I go to maybe applications,
I can do the same thing, but it'll only look
in the applications directory.
If I look at the library,
do the same thing, actually there's a gig there.
So disc usage is a way of getting
the amount of disc usage, how much space is being used
by a particularly directory.
So I tend to use, but one thing I might do actually,
I'll run a disc usage without the summary,
but I'll pipe it, sorry, not pipe it.
I'll redirect the output.
Instead of putting it into the terminal,
I'll redirect it into a file.
So now, instead of printing the output,
it'll put it all inside this report file,
and if I do less report, I can then go through
and look at it.
And from there, if I get rid of the dash H,
and actually just have bytes,
I can do things like sort dash MR report,
and then I can look at what's taking up
the most of amount of disc space,
so I can see
this particular file has a very big media directory.
I went right through.
You see I'm using the sort command,
and using the numerical column, that first numerical column
that shows number of bytes.
Doesn't particularly tell me how big that is
because I can't quickly convert to megabytes in my head,
but I can see that that's where the big directory is.
So that's the kind of thing I would use it for.
So that was disc free and disc usage.
And next we've got processes.
So we've looked at PS already,
auxww gives me a list of all the processes,
but it does like one snapshot at a time.
Now there is another command that I will use
quite frequently, called top,
which, depending on the operating system,
appears differently, so this is what top looks like
for a MAC, and I'm personally not very used to it.
And this is what top looks like on a Linux machine,
so I am used to this kind of thing.
So again, this is the production machine on JS Bin,
and I can see a whole bunch of different
bits of information here.
Now the first one is, I think,
I can sort by memory, by CPU.
Oh, help.
Yes, CPU, okay, so when I press C,
it sorts by most CPU being used,
and I can see that there is this command node
that is using quite a lotta CPU right now.
So it means that it is pretty CPU intensive,
and it's using 40% of the memory.
So up here I've got memory.
And it tells me how much memory is available,
how much is used.
Really what I'm looking at is the free amount memory.
So we've got about 80 meg free, which is fine.
Having no free memory is fine
as long as we're not going into this thing swp,
and now we're going into ops a little bit.
I always want my swp to be reasonably low, two meg.
Oh that's seven meg.
Anyway, if I proceed I'll get the long command,
the full command.
So before, I just had node,
Engine X node appeared a couple of times,
press C, I get the full command.
I can see that this is the main JS Bin process,
we have a stats D thing running here.
We have some Engine X running, and then cache and so on,
so we have a bunch of different processes running together.
Compare that to top on my MAC,
it looks very different.
Even the columns are in different orders.
We do have,
we have memory here, but I can't, to me it's not the same.
But you can instal another top programme.
So if you use brew or instal Htop,
it's like a visual version of top,
and it's much more similar to the activity monitor.
And I believe you can instal Htop
on other machines as well.
So, this is a bit more easy to read.
So I can see the process using the most CPU
on this machine right now
is ScreenFlow, the recording I'm doing right now.
I can see the list of CPUs, so I've got four cores
in this machine.
I can see that they're all doing a bit of work,
which is good, rather than being topped out.
See the amount of memory being used.
I can see swp being used.
I'm not sure if it is using any swp or not.
I think red even means, I don't know, I'm not sure.
But memory, maybe green is free.
That could be it.
But from here, I think I can also kill processes as well,
so you see down here, F9.
If I wanna kill some processes, I can do.
Let's try killing Htop.
This is asking me to send the signal,
so hit enter, killed Htop.
And the other thing to notice here as well,
couple of bits, load time up here, and uptime.
So uptime tells me how long the machine's been running.
So I haven't rebooted this machine in just over a month.
So that tells me how it's been actually turned on for.
And the load average,
it's a moving average of how much
the machine is under load.
There are, I think there's public algorithms
how this is worked out.
The way I read it is very much kind of finger in the air.
Two is kind of okay.
10, the machine's probably gonna be wearing a bit.
100, you probably won't be able
to do anything on the machine at all.
If we look across back to the production machine on JS Bin,
I'll be looking at the load average up here,
nice and low, under one.
My web servers, I tend to want the load average
to be under two, and this is the,
I think, the five-second average.
This is the 30-second average,
maybe five-minute average or one-minute average
and five minute.
Furthest to the left is the freshest value,
and this is the more long-term value.
We have the same thing offline here.
But I can also get it from the command line,
just by typing uptime.
So uptime gives me the load average, and it gives me
how long the machine's been up and running.
The same thing on a production machine.
See these commands, they exist on different
operating systems, but they give you the same
kind of information, so I can see
this machine's been up for over a year,
which is kind of crazy to think about.
It's got one user on it at the moment,
which is the user I'm signed in with,
and it has a load average of just under one,
which I'm pretty happy with.
This machine has a load average of two,
coming up to three, because I'm recording
a video at the same time.
Reasonably healthy, I'm fairly happy with that as well.
So those four commands, disc usage or DU,
DF, disc free, and then we have Htop on a MAC,
Htop you can instal on other machines as well.
Pretty sure you do brew instal Htop,
and uptime for a quick look.
And we also saw PS before,
which I tend to use to grab
individuals items out like Screenflow.
Cool, so that is the end of
how to shoot yourself in the foot
with commands, and how to get
a little bit of health and the status of your machine.